chore(docs): adding lvm documentation (#362)
flatcar/flatcar-website: content/docs/latest/setup/storage/lvm.md

---
title: Use LVM on Flatcar Container Linux
linktitle: Using LVM
description: How to use LVM to extend a logical volume across multiple disks 
weight: 30
aliases:
- ../../os/lvm
- ../../clusters/management/lvm
---

LVM - Logical Volume Management - allows you to create logical volumes, for example to use multiple physical disks as
one volume. This allows you to make the full use of all attached disks.

Flatcar Linux has built-in support for LVM.
This guide covers creation of logical volumes using LVM and how to use them.

## Creating LVM

There are two main ways to do this: create everything manually or use an ignition config. We will first cover
the manual way to get a better grip of what is happening, then we will cover the ignition way.

### Manual

> You can find all volumes using the `lsblk` command. For exampe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find all volumes using the `lsblk` command. For example:
```

---
title: Use LVM on Flatcar Container Linux
linktitle: Using LVM
description: How to use LVM to extend a logical volume across multiple disks 
weight: 30
aliases:
- ../../os/lvm
- ../../clusters/management/lvm
---

LVM - Logical Volume Management - allows you to create logical volumes, for example to use multiple physical disks as
one volume. This allows you to make the full use of all attached disks.

Flatcar Linux has built-in support for LVM.

> This guide covers create logical volumes using LVM and using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide covers creation of logical volumes using LVM and how to use them.
```

## Creating LVM

> There are two main ways to do this: create everything manually or properly use an ignition config. We will first cover
> the manual way to get a better grip of what's happening and then the proper way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main ways to do this: create everything manually or use an ignition config. We will first cover
the manual way to get a better grip of what is happening, then we will cover the ignition way.
```

### Manual

You can find all volumes using the `lsblk` command. For exampe:

```shell

# lsblk
NAME    MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINTS
loop3     7:3    0  68.3M  1 loop
loop4     7:4    0  39.3M  1 loop
loop5     7:5    0     4K  1 loop
sda       8:0    0 223.6G  0 disk
|-sda1    8:1    0   128M  0 part
|-sda2    8:2    0     2M  0 part
|-sda3    8:3    0     1G  0 part
| `-usr 254:0    0  1016M  1 crypt /usr
|-sda4    8:4    0     1G  0 part
|-sda6    8:6    0   128M  0 part  /oem
|-sda7    8:7    0    64M  0 part
`-sda9    8:9    0 221.3G  0 part  /
sdb       8:16   0 447.1G  0 disk
sdc       8:32   0 447.1G  0 disk
sdd       8:48   0 223.6G  0 disk

```

Now we know that we have `/dev/sda`, `/dev/sdb`, `/dev/sdc`, `/dev/sdd` available. However, we cannot use `/dev/sda` in
this scenario, but we can work with the others. 

```shell

> # pvcreate /dev/sda /dev/sdb /dev/sdc /dev/sdd
>   WARNING: Failed to connect to lvmetad. Falling back to device scanning.
>   Device /dev/sda excluded by a filter.

Reviewer: The paragraph above says that we cannot use `/dev/sda`, but here we still pass it to the `pvcreate` command. While `/dev/sda` seems to be ignored by `pvcreate` in the end ("Device /dev/sda excluded by a filter."), it's still confusing. So maybe we shouldn't be passing it there?

```suggestion
# pvcreate /dev/sdb /dev/sdc /dev/sdd
  WARNING: Failed to connect to lvmetad. Falling back to device scanning.
```

Author: Yeah I wasn't sure about this one. On the one hand, indeed we can't use it, on the other hand, I wanted to somewhat show that the command works for the others and just fails for the unusable

  Physical volume "/dev/sdb" successfully created.
  Physical volume "/dev/sdc" successfully created.
  Physical volume "/dev/sdd" successfully created.
```

You can verify that everything worked with the following commands:

```shell
# pvs
  PV         VG Fmt  Attr PSize   PFree
  /dev/sdb      lvm2 ---  447.13g 447.13g
  /dev/sdc      lvm2 ---  447.13g 447.13g
  /dev/sdd      lvm2 ---  223.57g 223.57g
  

>   # pvdisplay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# pvdisplay
```

  "/dev/sdd" is a new physical volume of "223.57 GiB"
  --- NEW Physical volume ---
  PV Name               /dev/sdd
  VG Name
  PV Size               223.57 GiB
  Allocatable           NO
  PE Size               0
  Total PE              0
  Free PE               0
  Allocated PE          0
  PV UUID               x0N0k2-5c6j-HlHZ-vuAX-s82V-Yx8v-Pi3rWa

  "/dev/sdc" is a new physical volume of "447.13 GiB"
  --- NEW Physical volume ---
  PV Name               /dev/sdc
  VG Name
  PV Size               447.13 GiB
  Allocatable           NO
  PE Size               0
  Total PE              0
  Free PE               0
  Allocated PE          0
  PV UUID               dRa71o-rYk9-gJKC-bJdC-tJVV-yarW-LHTwPu

  "/dev/sdb" is a new physical volume of "447.13 GiB"
  --- NEW Physical volume ---
  PV Name               /dev/sdb
  VG Name
  PV Size               447.13 GiB
  Allocatable           NO
  PE Size               0
  Total PE              0
  Free PE               0
  Allocated PE          0
  PV UUID               vu98O9-4UDD-TTGK-PvsY-g4bN-FeL4-lcqLy7

```

> As you can see, you do not yet have a virtual group. You use the `vgcreate` command to create one and add you PVs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, you do not yet have a virtual group. You use the `vgcreate` command to create one and add your PVs.
```

You need to specify the name of the group and the volumes you want to add to it like so:

```shell
# vgcreate base-layer /dev/sdb /dev/sdc /dev/sdd
  Volume group "base-layer" successfully created

```

Now you can go ahead and create a logical volume. We recommend to name it according to its purpose as in this example:

```shell
# lvcreate -n vol_docker -l 100%FREE base-layer
 Logical volume "vol_docker" created.
```

You can verify that everything worked well by issuing the following command:

```shell
# lvdisplay
  --- Logical volume ---
  LV Path                /dev/base-layer/vol_docker
  LV Name                vol_docker
  VG Name                base-layer
  LV UUID                d0ne0u-zBZQ-29f5-rkd9-XnZv-0vhE-rGmLvA
  LV Write Access        read/write
  LV Creation host, time rrackow-test, 2024-09-18 06:42:09 +0000
  LV Status              available
  # open                 0
  LV Size                1.09 TiB
  Current LE             286163
  Segments               3
  Allocation             inherit
  Read ahead sectors     auto
  - currently set to     256
  Block device           254:1
```

> As you can see we now have a total size the sum of the individual disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see we now have a total size the sum of the individual disks.
```

Next we need to use `mkfs` to create an `ext4` filesystem:

```shell
# mkfs.ext4 /dev/base-layer/vol_docker
mke2fs 1.47.0 (5-Feb-2023)
Discarding device blocks: done
Creating filesystem with 293030912 4k blocks and 73261056 inodes
Filesystem UUID: eed7e226-87f8-40e0-a49b-21eae4ef9620
Superblock backups stored on blocks:
        32768, 98304, 163840, 229376, 294912, 819200, 884736, 1605632, 2654208,
        4096000, 7962624, 11239424, 20480000, 23887872, 71663616, 78675968,
        102400000, 214990848

Allocating group tables: done
Writing inode tables: done
Creating journal (262144 blocks): done
Writing superblocks and filesystem accounting information: done
```

Now you can for example mount the volume for use with docker, by mounting it to `/var/lib/docker` like so:

```shell
# mkdir /var/lib/docker
# mount /dev/base-layer/vol_docker /var/lib/docker

```

### Ignition

> If you're not familiar, you can write butane configs in yaml format and later transpile it into an ignition config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not familiar, you can write butane configs in yaml format and later transpile it into an ignition config
```

using the [Butane Config Transpiler].

> In your ignition config you will need two units: on to create the volume group and one to mount the volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your ignition config you will need two units: one to create the volume group and one to mount the volume.
```

Additionally, you will also need a script that executes all the required commands.

We will start with the script. It basically packages everything from the manual part into a script like so:

```Bash
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

# Function to find all disks
find_volumes(){
  lsblk -d -o NAME,TYPE | awk '$2 == "disk" {print "/dev/" $1}'
}

disks=$(find_volumes)

# Create Physical Volumes
pvcreate "${disks}"

# Create Volume Group
vgcreate vg-root "${disks}"

# Create Logical Volume for data
lvcreate -n vol_root -l 100%FREE vg-root

# Format the data volume with ext4 filesystem
mkfs.ext4 /dev/vg-root/vol_root
```

> As you can see, we use a function to list **all** available disks. If you don't want all disks, you need to adjust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we use a function to list **all** available disks. If you do not want to use all disks, you need to adjust
```

> accordingly. If you want to mount to a different place, e.g. `/var/lib/docker` instead of `/`, you need to adjust this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the script accordingly. If you want to mount to a different place, e.g. `/var/lib/docker` instead of `/`, you need to adjust this
```
